# cSABR NOTES

## Investigating Internal Exons in Humans
Part of the SABR project is identifying the best aligners in different use cases. One of interest is in the detection of small, internal exons.

Short internal exons meet three criteria:
	- Start coordinate is after the gene start coordinate
	- end coordinate is before the gene start coordinate
	- total length of the exon is less than or equal to the maximum internal exon length (default = 50)

Detection of these is potentially problematic. They can be as short as 5bp, and aligners often struggle to correctly map reads to internal exons,
choosing instead to split the read across the two flanking exons. Therefore, both to serve as proof that the concept and rationale behind SABR is sound
and to better characterize the problem, I seek to survey the human genome to see how many genes have internal exons with length less than 50.
The idea here is to understand how our ability to detect and validate small internal exons has changed since the wide-scale adoption of next-gen RNA-sequencing technologies.
I will then compare the 'validation rate', for lack of a better term, to the detection and accuracy of the aligners in SABR. Given that the reads
generated are essentially 'perfect', as in having exact mappings, even when using biological data as a base, it is my thought that the detection 
and accuracy of the aligners will represent the 'expected' ability for each aligner to detect and validate internal exons in a given organism (i.e. humans)

The problem of detecting small internal exons should improve given a longer read length, but comparing long-read RNA-seq to traditional short-read RNA-seq is beyond the current scope of the project.

potentially interesting angles to pursue
- what method (sequencing/alignment) was used to validate this internal exon?
- how many internal exons exist in the human genome/what is the incidence rate
- how many are validated by RNA-seq
	- this is in contrast to something like EST data.
	- what method was used to validate this internal exon?
	- for those NOT validated by RNA-seq, what aligners/methods were used to validate the other parts of the genome?
- are there any truly interesting genes that contain small internal exons?
	- what are the GO terms for genes with small internal exons? Are any enriched?

### Plan
1. run SABR on human genome data.
2. determine performance across aligners on small internal exons generated by the read simulation function in `files`
3. compare performance to validation rate of internal exons by RNA-seq in humans

### Results

Genes were identified using the `readgff` function from the `korflab.py` module. The script used to identify them is `iesearcher.py`
in the `analysis` directory in this repo.

using:
```bash
zcat ../softlinks/generated/gencode49_primary_shortIE.gff3.gz | cut -f3 | grep -c "gene"
```
to count the number of genes with small internal exons, ending up with **19453**.

Of these **19453** genes, the distribution is as follows:
```
      4 IG_C_gene
      1 IG_C_pseudogene
      5 TR_C_gene
      2 artifact
   6118 lncRNA
     13 processed_pseudogene
  12939 protein_coding
      6 transcribed_processed_pseudogene
     39 transcribed_unitary_pseudogene
    236 transcribed_unprocessed_pseudogene
      4 unitary_pseudogene
     86 unprocessed_pseudogene
```

These numbers were obtained using this command:
```bash
zcat ../softlinks/generated/gencode49_primary_shortIE.gff3.gz | grep -w "gene" | cut -f9 | cut -f3 -d \; | cut -f2 -d \= | sort | uniq -c
```

**12939** protein coding genes seemed suspiciously high, so next I made a more rigorous filter intending to discard exons on the edges of genes. My initial attempt relied on the start and end coordinates being within the region of the gene without meeting or crossing the border.
However, there may be genes where the first exon does not share a start coordinate with the gene itself. Rather than search all genes by hand to 
determine this, I instead focused on creating 'transcripts' of each gene with every exon, then discarding the first and last ones.

### Next steps:


 
## Notes on Random Builds

All builds completed with 10 chromosomes and the --double flag enabled.

### Fixed seed, variable length

Using seed = 1, genomes with internal exons that had a max length of 50, 100, 150, and 200.


### Fixed length, variable seedd

Using a fixed length of 50 for internal exons, tested effects of random genome on aligner performance

### Fixed length, fixed seed, noncanonical sites

Seed = 1, mexon_len = 50


```bash
# saving this for posterity
for dir in `ls -A .`; do mkdir -p `pwd`/$dir/reads/double `pwd`/$dir/reads/plus `pwd`/$dir/reads/minus; python3 ../../build_full/ftxparse.py ./$dir/build/ double; mv *.tsv ./$dir/reads/double/; python3 ../../build_full/ftxparse.py ./dir/$build/ +; mv *.tsv ./$dir/reads/plus; python3 ../../build_full/ftxparse.py ./$dir/build/ -; mv *.tsv ./$dir/reads/minus; done

# Lmao
```

```bash
#oh it got worse
for dir in `ls -A .`; do for sdir in `ls -A ./$dir/reads`; do mkdir -p ./$dir/reads/$sdir/results; for file in `find ./$dir/reads/$sdir -maxdepth 1 -type f`; do python3 ../../build_full/reads/accfinder.py $file ./$dir/reads/$sdir/ > ./$dir/reads/$sdir/results/`echo $file | cut -f1 -d '_'`.results ; done; done; done;
```

```bash
#and again i say...
for dir in `ls -A .`; do for progname in `ls -A ~/DATA/generated/csvs/`; do for file in `find $dir -type f -name "*.gz"`; do ~/Code/FToolboX/src/ftbx $file > ~/DATA/generated/csvs/$progname/$progname.$dir.csv; done; done; done
#awful
```

```bash
# home version
for dir in `ls -A .`; do for progname in `ls -A ~/results/csvs`; do for file in `find $dir -type f -name "*.gz`; do ~/Code/FToolboX/src/ftbx $file | gzip > ~/results/csvs/$progname/$progname.$dir.csv.gz; done; done; done
```